Thank you again. Welcome. Thank you for taking the time to come, reflect on the teachings,
reflect on the practice, and take it to heart together for the benefit of everyone. So as
usual, again, and again, and again, we come back as we begin to do that this hour, as
well as with anything connecting with these three essential attitudes, the three motivations
of our practice, connecting with our joy, appreciation for this precious fleeting opportunity
we have this moment, with all of its freedoms and endowments, and really connect, expand,
deepen, breathe with bravery and love, and all the four boundless attitudes, our bodhichitta,
thinking of every living being that we can truly be of benefit to them, that they can
be free of suffering and all its causes, and know their true nature without any obscuration,
and that our own practice can be a means for that, but really heartfelt, big, vast bodhichitta
connection, and then our purity, devotion, and trust to the true goodness nature of everything,
our own mind, our own heart, the minds and hearts of others, the essential nature of
everything is pure, enlightened, good, good from the beginning, beginningless beginning.
You know, these are the three kind of essential attitudes of all of our practice, and that's
why it's so important that we're stressed by our precious teachers to really connect
with these three motivations at the beginning of every session, because again, it's from
these three attitudes, instilling them, reflecting on them, nurturing them in our mind and heart,
that's where all of our practice grows from and radiates and becomes more and more rich
and full, it really keeps us right on our axis of a really beneficial and essential practice.
These three attitudes are the heart of the three yana practice, of the nine yanas, of
all of our practice, and here we are doing the nundra, the essential practices.
So I thought, you know, today, just reflecting more, we have such an ocean of teachings,
they all come back to our nundra practice, there's so much going on in our lives and
in this world, we can make meaning of it all and bring it to benefit through our practice.
So a few people have kind of asked some just real kind of on the ground questions regarding
practice, the actual kind of structure of our practice.
So I just thought to kind of generally, gently, simply go over a little bit of that structure,
the frame, the container, that's going to really, that's the whole point of our formal
practice, right, is to be a place to kind of catch and hold all these vast, profound
ideas and take them to heart and make use of what's going on within ourselves and in
the world and bring it in with bodhicitta and all these, again, these essential attitudes
and really bring benefit to everything arising.
So we've gone over it again, but I know again, I've talked, a few people had kind of asked
these questions, so kind of just go over them again, and I don't know every single person
who's joining us, especially through the webcast.
So again, people may be at different levels of familiarity with the practice.
So we have our structure of our nundra, right, we have our basically our outer nundra and
inner nundra.
And again, I'm not going to go into real specific details here, but just kind of give it a general
overview to kind of balance everything out and then get to some real questions.
So our outer nundra is what these are these four thoughts that turn the mind towards the
Dharma, that we've gone over so many times, and kind of just even in the last several
sessions that I've gone over kind of a little bit slowly, these four thoughts again that
turn the mind to the Dharma, that soften our mind, soften our hearts to kind of take account
of our situation.
So again, what are they, in essence, really looking at samsara, looking at our situation,
which presently is samsara mind.
And we're not the only beings in samsara, everyone who hasn't realized their own nature
in all the varying degrees of that is in samsara.
And samsara is suffering, is challenges, is anxious, is unknowing.
The cause of samsara is that not knowing, and all the actions we take based on to misunderstanding
how things are, it's not reliable.
And yet within all of the experience of samsara, here we are, free of so many extreme situations.
Again, this precious human life the Buddha taught is ideal for being free of getting
out of samsara.
We're free of so many extreme situations, both in the human realm as well as other realms
of beings.
And we have, while we are in samsara, through our fortunate connection with the Buddhas who
have realized their true nature, we have this wonderful connection and possibility to practice
and take to heart.
And of course it's not forever, it's fleeting, impermanence.
And again, samsara has causes, the ignorance and the actions we take.
So reflecting on karma, cause and effect, again just briefly going over these four thoughts
that turn the mind, impermanence, precious human birth, impermanence, the law of karma
and that everything in samsara is uncomfortable.
So if we're looking for refuge in samsara, for relief in samsara, for certainty in samsara,
we're not going to find it in our ignorance, we're going to try to bring out our wisdom.
And how do we do that?
We do that through the guide, through those who have realized their wisdom, this is when
we enter in this gate of refuge, which begins the whole path, the whole Buddhist path begins
in that trust, that's you know, confidence and interest in the Buddha, in the Dharma,
in the Sangha, in the wisdom mind of the Buddha, one who has fully realized their own true
nature of wisdom, love, compassion and through great kindness and our own good connections
appears to turn others towards recognizing that in themselves in various myriad ways,
right?
So then we have the inner nundra practices, which are in five sections, five main sections.
We have our refuge bodhicitta, mandala offering, vajrasattva practice, guru yoga, and then
additionally aspiration to realize and perfect our power practice and then dedicate everything
with big bodhicitta, these kind of seven sections, but these five are the main sections are in
every nundra practice, right?
So again, and then with our refuge practice, we're taking refuge from now until enlightenment.
What are we taking refuge in? Ultimately again, in the wisdom, in the Buddha, the fully developed,
fully awakened Buddha, the great kindness teacher, the Buddha who appeared in this fortunate
Aion and through the sunlight of his message, so many other great enlightened beings have
come to this world and ripen themselves in this world and share the teachings, even this
second living Buddha, Padmasambhava.
So right in our refuge practice, we're saying from now until attaining the heart of enlightenment,
I take refuge in the Lama, the three jewels.
So what is the Lama? This is again, the Lama is embodying all the Buddha, all the Buddhas
here embodied as Guru Padmasambhava embodies all the teachings in all the ways they come
and is fully realized their meaning embodies all the Sangha actually appearing in this
world and beyond all those who embody and practice and support each other.
And then especially in our Vajrayana teachings, the Lama, the teacher, the Guru, the Lama,
so ripe with realization and bodhicitta, knowledge, wisdom, realization, kindness, unrelenting
compassion.
Having that guide in our life is so precious. I mean, Lama Dropa gave wonderful talk a few
weeks ago about these qualities of the Lama. Again, we have in our nundra practice, Guru
Padmasambhava is appearing as the refuge tree embodiment of all the Buddhas of the three
times of the past, of the present, of the future, inseparable from all the Arhats, all
the bodhisattvas and all the Bhumis, every single teaching possible and shining forth
all the Yidams, all the Dakinis, all the Dharmapalas. If all enlightened wisdom, activity,
blessings,
realization and enlightened activity is all encompassed and realized and embodied as Guru
Padmasambhava, pervading all minds, all worlds, all experiences.
And we're standing before Guru Padmasambhava and all the objects of refuge in the refuge
tree rising up out of this pure lake on a jewel, you know, lotus. And then our mother
and father of this life are to our right and our left. These beautiful conditions, again,
in a way, our first teachers in this life. And then before us are all the beings of samsara
who all have their intrinsic nature and we just have not realized it. And we have this
beautiful, all-pervading presence of Guru Padmasambhava embodied from now until attaining the heart
of enlightenment. I take refuge in the Lama, the three jewels, the Buddha, the Dharma, the
Sangha. And then of course, the Lama has appeared in this life. Guru Padmasambhava is the living
Buddha of this time with everything I just said. But then on the ground, we have this
precious opportunity of having qualified human teachers that we can encounter and interact
with, ask questions, have guidance, see their example of how they are living in this world
at this time. There's context like this famous saying, right? The human teacher of this life
is kinder than all the Buddhas, kinder than the Buddha himself. He said, is here and we
have this connection. So our own human teacher of this life is inseparable from Guru Padmasambhava.
So again, just the point of that is really remembered. That's an important part. Guru
Padmasambhava, inseparable from our own human teacher of this life, the precious Kimpose
and Dhanjal Rinpoche. Or if you have other teachers, again, the Buddhas are completely
unimpeded. And we have, we are in this world at this time with these great masters. And
so from now until attaining the Heart of Enlightenment, I take refuge in the Lama, the Three Jewels
.
And our Lama of this life is a qualified teacher, like Kimpose, Dhanjal Rinpoche, according to
all the teachings. As students, we want to really look at what are the qualities of a
qualified teacher? And of course, what are the qualities of a qualified student, but
become familiar with them? And what are they essentially? They walk their talk. And then
by observing a qualified teacher, equally important, we need to be like Kimpose, an
expert in knowing the qualities of a qualified teacher, be expert in contacting a qualified
teacher. We have so many books, even so many recordings of qualified teachers. But we have
qualified teachers such as Kimpose, Dhanjal Rinpoche, that we can meet in real life and
talk one in one in real time in the same room. That's very precious. Making contact with
that teacher, asking questions, receiving teachings, taking them to heart, asking, you know, more
questions, keeping in that feedback in this life. So, how beautiful, how wonderful, if
only we can all really continue to nourish that connection. That's why our teachers are
here to guide us again beyond from in this life until enlightenment, in all the lives
we meet. No one, no Buddha has ever appeared without a teacher. And we are here due to
this beautiful lineage that's lived to this world due to the unending blossoming of these
practitioners who've received the teachings and taken them to heart and moved through
challenges, removed their obscurations, engendered their bodhicitta, uprooted their ego-clinging,
revealed their own wisdom, and been a great guide for beings. So, one way to just kind
of going on the rift of refuges, there's different ways, attitudes we can take refuge. One of
them is just simply out of fear, fear of seeing how rocky this world is. And then, when we
do feel that trust in the Buddha, in the Dharma, in the Sangha, and we feel we meet this living
being who's embodying so beautifully these teachings and really engendering them, making
them available and understandable to ourselves and others. And we make a connection with
that teacher, and we start to practice. We're going to change. We're going to become more
aware of maybe our challenges. Things might even start to seem a little more rocky. But
that doesn't necessarily mean something's wrong. So again, what I'm getting at is we
take refuge from now, until attaining enlightenment. When we feel that trust, we have to remind
ourselves that we are making connection with wisdom, with compassion, with love that's
unconditional and uncontrived. And the more we can release the ways in which we are contrived
and are stuck up, the more we can truly connect more with our nature. So I guess my whole
point of going on and on about this is just that simple part from now until attaining the
heart of enlightenment, take refuge in the Lama, the Three Jewels, for the benefit of
all beings. So then with our with our nundra practice itself, the Lama again embodies everything.
When we realize these four thoughts, the Lama is present, we appreciate more what the Lama
has to, has offered us. We have more trust, more courage, more commitment to realize the
path for the benefit of all beings. We can accumulate our wisdom, accumulate our merit,
fully ripen for the benefit of beings. And so with our practice in our nundra, we're
doing that. And so like when as far as the time when we are doing our nundra practice,
everybody has different amounts of time available to them. So like when we're doing these Saturday
nundras, generally, we kind of make the time we have about an hour, hour and 15 minutes
or so depending on how long we talk. So I've said it before, but I hope everyone knows
the way we recite our nundra during these sessions, it's not limited to that. We want
to recite that each section according to our time. So being familiar with the rhythm of
the nundra connecting with the meaning is the most important. And so you can, we want
to have the again, taking to heart these three frames or three ways of looking at our practice,
how we begin our main practice and how we conclude. So basically, again, like we've
been doing, beginning with these three motivations, relaxing, breath purification, connecting with
the three motivations, renunciation, bodhicitta, our devotion and pure perception, calling to
the mind and heart, the lama and all the llamas of the lineage. And then we begin our practice
and we often insert this calling the llama from a far prayer, which is a beautiful, wonderful,
spontaneous song from the heart of Deut. And then we'll go to after that, if you do do
that, then we'll definitely go to the actual nundra practice. So again, these four thoughts,
this outer nundra, which is on page 27. Again, you can recite this at least three times.
You can say it all in Tibetan, all in English, English and Tibetan. Most important, reflect
on the meaning. And then our refuge, the refuge practice. With the visualization, we're going
to be doing this with full prostrations when possible, which again, we've described this
before and we do it together. I think we don't need to describe what that is right now. So
with the visualization, with the prostration, we're reciting these two lines. And again,
reflecting on the meaning that's so vast, but really with that love and devotion, joy,
commitment, courage, and affirmation in our heart, making our refuge vow for as long as
we can. And then going to bodhicitta, these two lines again, before the lineage, before
Guru Padma Sambhaavan, all the objects of refuge, who kind of bear witness to us and
support us and really connecting with our bodhicitta aspiration and our commitment to
actualize our bodhicitta. Just like we say from now until samsara is empty, that we will
accomplish the benefits and happiness of all sentient parent beings and all the ways that
means accumulating merit with the mandala offering. If you have your mandala plate,
you can use that. And again, we've had a whole other sessions where we go through the details
of these things. So even if you look on our YouTube channel, if you want to look at something
we've said, I bet if you just search for mandala offering, you can find that. I think we had
at least one session where we really went over the details of making the actual mandala
offering with the plate and that, but essentially offering everything to the Supreme Goodness
to the three jewels. And then purifying all of our obscurations with our Vajrasattva practice,
Vajrasattva again inseparable from the Lama, bearing witness to our own, you know, connecting
with our own purification and recognizing our mistakes, including the ones we have not
aren't aware of purifying through the profound means of this mantra recitation and visualization
using the four supports. And then concluding that, and then we move to the guru yoga. Again,
embodiment of all mingling our mind with the realization mind of Guru Padmasambhava. And
letting that dissolve after the mantra recitation. And then this aspiration for to realize the
poet practice, making that connection with Amitabha as part of again, our living experience
and then the charity of the body, dedication of virtues, reciting this. Again, all of this
connecting with the meaning. And now someone was asking, of course, when we do this, we
can recite, like I said, three times, all in English, all in Tibetan, Tibetan and English,
the meanings really, meaning and heart are essential. So however that makes sense for
you. And then as you have time, you can recite as many times with each section. But you want
to move through and complete the whole nundra move through the whole book. And then when
you do that, then we're going to do this third part of concluding really dedicate the merit
and make these beautiful aspiration prayers in one voice with a lineage like we always
do. And then in the again, going back to the main section, someone was asking really just
for really to clarify with accumulation practice, we have the skillful means of doing our
accumulation
of our nundra. And so we can do nundra without accumulations. Sure, again, it's connecting
with that heart and the atmosphere that is embodying and holding all the teachings and
all the practices. And then to kind of assess a skillful means for really ensuring that
we kind of saturate our mind and heart and experience with these essential practices.
We do these accumulations. And so when we're told, and we're all encouraged to complete
our nundra. And what does that mean? I mean, it means to realize it in the big picture,
really realize what all this wishes and practices for. And then more simply in this life, we're
going to do 100,000 recitations of each of these five main practices. And so with a refuge
that's combined with prostrations. So yes, what we're doing when we're accumulating each
recitation is one full prostration and recitation of the refuge prayer. So we're really counting
here, every prostration. So one recitation with one prostration is one. And we just do
that again and again and again, drop by drop, an ocean is made, you know, again, according
to our physical physical capacities and our time capacities. But keeping that constancy
is important with all of this. And of course, prostrations, some of us are older, you know,
so if you need to modify and ask your teacher. Okay. But yes, so as far in regard to the
accumulations, one prostration with the prayer is one. So you can do one mala, two malas,
three malas, or sometimes if you have a like a tally counter, you can keep that on the
floor and click it each time you go down. And you can say, I'm going to do my prostrations
for five minutes, 10 minutes, 20 minutes, 40 minutes, 60 minutes, whatever is attainable
for you to keep as a regular rhythm that you can hold up, not like exhaust yourself and
be injured and not be able to do it. But what can we maintain on a regular basis, you know,
to again connect with the practice and generate, you know, heart connection. And then with
our bodhicitta, what are we accumulating? We're accumulating every recitation of our
bodhisattva vow here. So 100,000. And with our mandala offering, when we're really going
to focus on accumulating the mandala section, it's with every time we offer the mandala,
holding the plate, making the five continents and the sun and the moon, offering it all
up, you know, to the three jewels, each time we do that is one and again, we add and we
keep track of that. So we do like often, I just we don't have our mandala plates ready
here and we often don't have enough time to really do a lot. So we do this mandala mudra.
But when you are doing and accumulating, especially when you're accumulating, you want to actually
make the effort to get a mandala plate and have some grains and stones or whatever you're
going to offer and have all the materials to actually make the mandala offering with
the plate and the offerings. Okay. With the bodhicitta practice, then again with the meditation
here as far as accumulations, every recitation of the hundred syllable mantra is one. So
we're going to recite the within accumulating our nundra, this hundred hundred syllable
mantra of Atrasava, we recite 100,000 times over the span of time we do it. So again,
it takes a little longer, but you just see, you know, I'm going to do, you know, 10 malas
of this hundred syllable mantra, whatever is workable for you. But we're, we're collecting
is the hundred syllable mantra. And then the it then that Vajrasava comes in and then we're
reciting the six syllable Vajrasava mantra. And that's going out, you know, and we're
just resounding with all the three realms revealed as the immaculate, you know, three
Kaya's and to Vajrasava state of everything. And that we're isn't necessarily part of the
rest of the accumulation, but you do that for as long as you have time. And then with
the guru yoga, again, with the meditation, with the heartfelt connection and the visualizations,
then what we're accumulating here is every recitation of the Vajra guru mantra, Oma
whom Vajra guru, Pema, see the home reciting that is one. So we recite 108, that's a hundred
if we recite and so on and so forth. So what we're accumulating here is each recitation
of the Vajra guru mantra. And then we complete that practice meditate, and then this six,
the transference and that making this heartfelt connection with Amitabha, this isn't part
of the nundra accumulations. But again, we want do want to spend time with that. This
is powerful connection we're making with Amitabha to attain, you know, become accomplished in
the practice of Poa, which again, eventually, there's more teachings and more exact practices,
but this is making that connection. And this essential kind of really important connection
with Amitabha. And then this seventh, likewise, we're not necessarily doing an accumulation
practice with this, but we're connecting with this pure motivation. And again, this is the
seed of our true practice, our big bodhicitta practice, totally uprooting, you know, our
ego clinging and being total nourishment for all beings everywhere. So I hope that's helpful.
And then also, as you can with your time, make sure to just totally relax. Like often
when we're moving through this, we'll do a section, and then we'll just totally let go
and just make the big offering, the big refuge, big bodhicitta, big purification, the big
guru yoga of just as best we can, just totally letting go and just resting in our awareness.
Also doing that between each section of the nundra, if you can, but definitely at least
after the guru yoga, or at the very end of the practice before you dedicate the merit,
or all of them, again, depending on your time. But I think really important that we do, do
the work and relax, totally go home. And then again, reconnect with the visualization, the
practice, and then that's where accumulating merit and wisdom as we go. So maybe we should
just do the practice. I hope that's helpful. And I know I talked with a couple people who
I said I'd address some of these questions with during this session. So forgive me if
I forgot something, and please do write to us. It's nice if be wonderful if we were in
like a real time interaction. But we're really kind of happy to go over the you know, these
points because we're all here, right, we're practicing, we're studying together. So like
having that interchange is really nice. Okay, so thank you. I hope that was helpful. We
all bring it to heart. And again, the main really just remembering how wonderful our
opportunity is. And really being with our practice allowing it allowing it to purify
us, to open us connect us with what's more authentic, with more wisdom, more love, more
compassion, both in ourselves, and trusting to that nature in our teacher and the fully
enlightened Buddha. So let's just have a few moments silence. And then we began our session
with the seven line prayer and lineage prayer. So just kind of reconnecting with that will
recite the seven line, the seven line prayer and the short lineage prayers, meaning like
what's in the intro book itself. And then we'll continue. Okay, thank you for taking
the time to practice together, reflect on the teachings, dedicate the mirror, now we
move into the world. I just thought I realized earlier, when I was talking about accumulations,
I did not go over that entirely completely. So right, I went over what counts as one accumulation
for each of the five practices that were accumulating in the nundra. But I just thought of then
of course, the overall goal is to do at least 100,000 100,000, sometimes they say even 111,000
of each section. So I guess, I want to add, when we are accumulating, again, you see what
works for you. But what just for clarity, what we're going to do is we begin the practice.
We move through each section, meaning, you know, opening prayers, the four thoughts,
and then we go refuge, bodhicitta, mandala offering, watrasattva, guru yoga, and the
endurance, and then the final dedication, and we dedicate the merit. So when you're
accumulating, often Rinpoche's will have people begin by accumulating the guru yoga. So in
that case, what we're going to do is again, you go through in sequence, the nundra opening
prayers, go through, you know, four thoughts, refuge, bodhicitta, mandala, vajrasattva, and
then guru yoga. And when you get to the guru yoga, then you have the proportion of time
of your practice really allow you to really sit and really accumulate and be with the
meditation and the practice for whatever your goal is, whether it's, you know, 10 malas,
20 malas, whatever your goal is, and then continue. And then likewise, then say, often
once you accumulate the guru yoga, then often then Rinpoche's will have people focus on
the refuge with prostrations. So then similarly, you would have opening prayers for thoughts,
and then have your the bulk of your the time of your practice be with the prostrations
and refuge, but then allow so after you finish whichever you're going to do, you know, one
mala of prostrations or whatever, 20 minutes of prostrations, you do that amount, and then
finish, and then you continue and then go through the bodhicitta, mandala, vajrasattva,
guru yoga, and then the poa transference, and then dedicate the merit. And then likewise,
once you finish that, then you might go through and then have the bulk be your vajrasattva,
I mean your bodhicitta. And then when you complete that, then vajrasattva. And then once you've
gone through all those, you've completed your nundro, wonderful. And then often we keep
that practice, we keep accumulating some people accumulate many times. So I just thought that
should be clear. And often, too, when you're just beginning your nundro, sometimes there's
a practice which is called kind of like preparing the vessel. So you may begin, you accumulate,
you again, you go through the rhythm of going through the whole sadhana, and then you spend
time, more time in the sections you're accumulating, going in the sequence. But then say you
accumulate
10,000 guru yoga, and then 10,000 prostrations and 10,000 bodhicitta, 10,000 mandala offerings,
10,000 vajrasattva. And then once you've done that cycle of accumulating 10,000 in each,
then you finish, then you finish the guru yoga, finish the refuge, finish bodhicitta,
finish mandala, finish the vajrasattva. So any questions, please feel free to call or write,
but I just thought to go over that part of the accumulation as well. So thank you. We'll meet
again next week, I think, and then that may be our last nundro session for a little while.
We have our one-month retreat starting, and then our summer programs here at Padmasamyaling are
pretty much starting right away. So next week, we'll meet again. Thank you.
[End of Audio]